Phase 1 summary: application foundation
Phase 1 taught you how to create a clean, configurable Flask application before adding game features.

The main goal was: flask run serves one page, configuration comes from the environment, and a dependency container manages object lifetimes correctly.

1. Application factory
You learned to create the Flask app through a function such as create_app() instead of creating one global application immediately.

Why it matters
An application factory allows you to create different app instances for: development, testing, production.
Tests can use a different database and settings without modifying the development application.

Main flow : This keeps application assembly in one predictable place.

create_app()
    ↓
load configuration
    ↓
initialize extensions
    ↓
create dependency container
    ↓
register blueprints
    ↓
return Flask app


2. Configuration management
You learned to keep configuration separate from application logic.
Configuration values include:

- Flask secret key,
- database URL,
- debug mode,
- testing mode.

The intended flow is:
.env.local
    ↓
environment variables
    ↓
configuration object
    ↓
Flask application

Important lesson: fail fast
Required settings should be checked when the app starts.
For example, if the Flask secret key is missing, the app should show a clear startup error instead of failing unexpectedly during a later request.

.env.local vs .env.example
.env.local:
- contains your real local values,
- must not be committed,
- is ignored by Git.

.env.example:
- contains placeholder values,
- documents required configuration,
- can be committed.


3. Blueprint and route organization
You created a blueprint and a simple home route.
A blueprint groups related routes together. Later, the project can have separate modules for:
- authentication,
- tic-tac-toe,
- Guess Who?,
- Pedantle,
- administration,
- scores.

Why start with one route? The first route proves that the application wiring works:
a. Flask starts,
b. configuration loads,
c. the blueprint is registered,
d. routing works,
e. templates are found,
f. HTML is returned.
It is a wiring test, not yet a game feature.


4. Templates
You created a first Jinja template for the home page.
This introduced the basic request flow:
browser request
    ↓
Flask route
    ↓
render_template()
    ↓
Jinja HTML template
    ↓
browser response

This will later grow into: layout.html, reusable Jinja macros, game-specific templates, forms, dashboards.


5. Running Flask locally
You learned that, during the early phases: PostgreSQL runs inside Docker and Flask runs inside your local Python virtual environment. This is intentional.
The roadmap delays full application Dockerization until Phase 10 because Dockerizing the app too early adds another possible source of bugs while you are still learning Flask.
The application was started with the Flask factory and tested in the browser.


6. Dependency injection
Dependency injection means a class receives the objects it needs instead of creating them internally.

Less flexible approach : UserService creates its own database object
Better approach : Container creates the database object UserService receives the database object

The dependency container centralizes object creation and makes it easier to : replace implementations, test services, control object lifetimes, avoid duplicated setup code.


7. The dependency container
You created a small container with two important operations: register(), resolve()

- register() : Tells the container what dependency exists, how to create it, which lifetime it uses.
- resolve() : Requests an instance from the container.

The roadmap specifically recommends keeping the container simple. You do not need, at this stage:
- automatic dependency discovery,
- complex type-hint auto-wiring,
- decorator-based registration,
- plugin systems,
- lazy module loading.
The purpose is to understand dependency lifetimes, not to build a framework inside your framework.


8. The three dependency lifetimes

A. Singleton : One object for the entire Flask process.

Use for configuration, password hashing services, JWT encoders, stateless shared utilities.

Behavior:
resolve() → object A
resolve() → object A

The same object is reused.


B. Scoped : One object per request.

Use for database sessions, units of work, current user, request-specific state.

Within one request:
resolve() → object A
resolve() → object A

During a new request:
resolve() → object B

Object A and object B are different.

C. Transient : A new object every time it is resolved.

Use for small stateless helpers, cheap formatters, short-lived utility objects.

Behavior:
resolve() → object A
resolve() → object B

The two objects are different even during the same request.


9. Why lifetime rules matter
You learned that a long-lived object must not retain a shorter-lived object.

Dangerous example:
Singleton service → scoped database session
The singleton could capture one request’s database session and reuse it for later requests.

This may cause:
- stale transactions,
- closed sessions,
- request data leaking between users,
- intermittent database errors,
- connection pool exhaustion.

The important rule is:
Singleton → singleton dependencies only
Scoped → scoped or singleton dependencies

This is one of the main architectural lessons in Phase 1.


10. Request scope and Flask context
Scoped dependencies were connected to Flask’s request context using flask.g.
The lifecycle is:

request starts
    ↓
create scoped storage
    ↓
resolve scoped objects when needed
    ↓
request ends
    ↓
clean up scoped objects

Why cleanup matters
Later, scoped dependencies may contain: database sessions, transactions, file handles, network resources.
If they are not cleaned up, each request may leave resources open until the application becomes unstable.
The teardown function ensures that resources are closed at the end of the request.


11. Step verification
You used a temporary identity service and debug route to verify the three lifetimes.

The test checked:
- singleton resolutions return the same object,
- scoped resolutions return the same object within one request,
- transient resolutions return different objects.

Expected behavior:
singleton_same_within_request = true
scoped_same_within_request    = true
transient_same_within_request = false

After refreshing the route:

- singleton ID should remain the same,
- scoped ID should change,
- transient IDs should be different each time.
The debug route was temporary and should be removed after verification.
This verification matters because it proves that the container is not merely storing registrations; it is enforcing the intended lifecycle behavior.


12. testing commands
Useful commands included: .\.venv\Scripts\Activate.ps1
Activates the virtual environment.

Starts Flask using the application factory :
python -m flask --app app:create_app run --debug

Checks that Python files compile successfully :
python -m compileall app

Shows changed and untracked files : 
git status

Commits and pushes the safe Phase 1 files :
git add app .env.example
git commit -m "Build Flask application foundation"
git push

You must not commit .env.local.

